hey and welcome to this free course on
the css grid layout module css grid is
actually a whole new way of creating
website layouts it'll give you more
flexibility than any other layout system
or framework and it's also pretty
intuitive to learn
before we jump into the course i want to
point out that what you see in front of
you now is not a normal video it's an
interactive scrimba screencast and that
means that you as the viewer at any
given time can jump into the code and
change it
you can for example head over to the
index.css
and change the color value for the h1
tag to let's say black
then see how your changes affected the
output in the simulator window here so
feel free to do this whenever you feel
the need for experimenting with the code
so that you make sure that you properly
understand what we're going through
okay so why do you want to learn about
css grid
well first of all because it makes your
life a whole lot easier when it comes to
creating two dimensional layouts which
basically almost all websites consist of
secondly as you'll see it'll make your
markup significantly simpler
it'll also give you a lot more
flexibility when it comes to changing
the layouts for example through
responsiveness and it'll also enable you
to actually skip frameworks like for
example bootstrap
and finally css grid is now supported by
all the major browsers and the support
amongst global website traffic is
climbing quickly to learn exactly how
many percent at the time you're watching
this screencast check out this url here
now let's kick off the course by looking
at the benefits css grid has over a
framework like bootstrap
here we have created two mock-ups for a
website this one is done using css grid
and this one down here is done using
bootstrap the layout contains a header a
menu
content
and footer
the markup is found in the examples.html
here you can see the html for the
bootstrap example and here we have the
html for the grid example and we can
instantly see that the css grid markup
is significantly simpler than the
bootstrap markup
because gone are all the unnecessary row
items and the ugly class names
so as i mentioned
css grid will make your markup cleaner
benefit which of course would become
much more apparent if we were to turn
these two examples into full-blown
websites however this of course doesn't
tell the whole story as the grid example
of course needs css
which you can see here in the
examples.css here is the css needed to
create our grid example
conceptually what's happening here is
that instead of trying to define the
layout which is the columns and the rows
in the html we're rather defining
everything in the css and this brings us
to our next benefit which is that this
separation gives you a lot more
flexibility let's say that you for
example want the menu here to appear up
besides the header when it's being
viewed on mobile to make this happen in
our css grid example we simply create a
media query and then we target the items
which we want to change according to the
new layout which is the
header the menu and the content and then
simply give these their new values and
the result is that when we shrink the
page and if you look at this css grid
example you can see that
boom there the menu item jumped up to
the top row the header moves all the way
to the right and the content took up the
entire second row
we can change back boom like that
now if we were to try this in bootstrap
we'd quickly realize the downside of
having the layout
defined in the html because what you
want to do here is to make this menu
item jump up to the first row up here
however that's not trivial because the
menu item is already trapped in the
second row down here and in order to
move it up to the first row we actually
have to change our markup we have to cut
away this element
down here
and paste it in up here
that's not something you can do based
upon a simple media query in css
you can of course do it in javascript
but that's hacky and more complex so
what you want to do instead is learn css
grid and i'm going to teach you that in
this course so just sit tight and we'll
start the next lecture right away
hey
in this screencast you're going to learn
how to create grids through defining its
rows and columns a grid consists of two
main elements there's the container
which we have here and then there's the
items which are the elements inside the
container in our case six divs which
display the numbers from one to six now
without any grid layout this results in
six divs stacked on top of each other
i've also given them a little bit of
styling but that has nothing to do with
the grid layout itself to turn this
container into a grid we're going to
target it
and give it a display
of grid
if we run the code that won't result in
any layout change yet because we haven't
defined how we want our grid to look
like so by default it only has one
column and thereby it looks like we've
just stacked six divs on top of each
other in order to specify the columns
we'll give the container a grid
template columns will define how many
columns and how wide we want them to be
let's set the first one to a hundred
pixels the second one to auto and the
third one 200 pixels as well
auto in this case means that the column
will take up whatever remaining space
there is in the width
let's also give the grid a couple of
rows
with
template rows and let's give both of
them a height of 50 pixels
so in the grid template columns property
you define the width of the columns and
in the grid template rows you define the
height of the rows
and as you can see we have a nice little
grid here as expected it contains three
columns going from top to bottom
one
two
three and two rows going from left to
right one
two since the second column here is set
to auto this grid is also responsive
in order to make the grid look a little
bit nicer i want to give it a grid gap
property and set it to three pixels as
you can see that gives a nice little gap
between the items
now let's say we don't want our grid to
be three columns wide and two rows long
but rather two columns wide and three
rows long
then we simply need to remove a column
we can remove this last one here for
example
and add a row
200 pixels down here if we run the code
you can see that we have a completely
different grid two columns one two and
three rows one two three the two first
rows are 50 pixels tall however the
third one is 200 pixels and the grid is
still responsive as the second column is
set to auto so in the next screencast
i'm going to show you a few more ways of
setting these values inside the template
columns and grid template rows but
before we jump on to do that i would
recommend you to jump into the code here
and play around with the values so that
you're 100 sure that you understand the
relation between what's going on here in
the css and how that plays out in the
simulator over here so go ahead and do
that and i'll see you in the next
screencast
hey there in this screencast i'm going
to teach you a better and more powerful
way of defining columns and rows as you
can see we're now working in the
index.css file and not directly in the
html file that's because doing it in the
index.css gives us the benefits of
automatic updates in the browser window
so we have this very simple grid here
which you probably recognize from the
previous cast it got three columns the
first one being 100 pixels wide the
second being auto and the third is set
to 100 pixels as well so this grid is
responsive as the second column grows
and shrinks with the width of the
container we also have two rows which
are 50 pixels each
now the first thing we're going to do is
change the responsiveness of the grid
because let's say that we want all three
columns to grow in size as the container
grows in size
we want them to be equal regardless of
the width in order to achieve that i'm
going to teach you a new value which css
grid brings with it it's called fraction
unit and it's written like this one fr
let's set all three columns to be one
fraction unit each
we'll do one fr for the second one and
for the third one
and now as you can see
they all grow and shrink equally so what
happens here is that the grid splits the
entire width into three fractions and
each of the columns take up one fraction
unit
so if we change the second one here to
two fraction units
you can see that it'll always be twice
as wide as the first and third column
because now the grid has split the
entire width into four fraction units
and the second one takes up two of those
while the first and third column take up
one each
okay so let's go back to having each of
the columns equally wide
in this case we could actually write
this in a simpler way
we could do repeat
times one fraction units
as you can see it gives the exact same
result
so the first parameter of the repeat
function is the amount of rows or
columns and the second one is the value
which is the height or the width of the
rows or columns so let's say we want six
columns instead then we can simply
change this number here to six instead
and as you can see now our six items
fill up only one row as we have six
columns and six items in this grid
so let's go back to three
we can also do the same with the rows of
course
it
two times 50 pixels
finally i also want to show you a
simpler way of defining the rows and
columns because we can use the shorthand
method for this
so i'm going to copy the rows value here
and remove that line and also remove the
dash columns
i'm going to paste in the rose value
forward slash and then let the column
value come after that and that'll give
the exact same result
so grid template is the shorthand method
for grid template columns and grid
template rows
and it can be a bit hard to remember
which one of rows or columns goes first
and which one goes last and the rule i
use to remember this is to think of it
as drawing an l you start at the top and
go downwards across the rows and then
you go to the right across the columns
start with the rows
and then the columns so in the next
screencast you're going to learn how to
adjust the size and position of the
items in the grid
so stay tuned and i'll see you there
hey in this screencast you're going to
learn how to adjust the position and
size of the items on the grid
which is critical to know in order to
create real-world websites with css grid
we're going to create a mock-up for
website and here in the index.html you
can see the markup for that
as you can see we're targeting each of
the items using a class name header menu
content and footer
to start with we have this 2x2 grid
each of the columns are one fraction
unit
so they're responsive
as you can see and each of the rows are
40 pixels tall
for our website though we're going to
need three rows as we want the header to
take up the top row the menu and the
content to be on the second row and the
footer to be on the third row all the
way at the bottom
so let's create a third row here let's
place it in between the two existing
rows and give it a height of 200 pixels
as you can see now the header head
render menu is on the top row and the
content on the footer in the second row
and our third row is blank as we haven't
filled it with content yet since our
items only take up the first four grid
cells so let's change that
we'll start by targeting the header and
making it span from the left hand side
all the way over to the far right hand
side
to achieve that we need to head into the
dot header and give it a grid column
start
set that to 1 and also give it a grid
column
end
at three
as you can see now the header spans
across the entire first row
and what we're saying here is that we
want the header to start at the first
column line and end at the third column
line
and you might wonder why we have three
column lines when we only have defined
two columns
well that's because the first column
line goes from top to bottom on the left
side of the grid the second column line
is the one that separates the two
columns and the third is the one that
goes from top to bottom on the far right
hand side of the grid
so when you have two columns you have
three column lines and you can write
that like this
alternatively though we can also use the
shorthand method which i prefer
let's remove this line here
and also remove dash start and rather do
one forward slash three as you can see
that gives the exact same result
let's also do the exact same thing with
the footer
like
that
now the footer also spans across the
entire width alternatively we could have
written this in a different way we could
have done we could have done one
forward slash
span two
that'll give the exact same result what
we're here saying is that we want the
footer to start at the first column line
and span across two columns
and finally there's also a third way
which is to write -1
that'll target the very last column line
now that we know that we want our footer
and header to span all the way to the
last column line we can do that with
both of them
and take the advantage of the fact that
in the future we might not know how many
columns we're going to have in this grid
as we can change that however we want
so this is a nice little trick when you
don't know exactly how many columns the
item will span across in the grid and to
prove that point for you i'm actually
going to change the amount of columns we
have in the grid right now
because we don't want the menu here and
the content to take up an equal amount
of space in the width that doesn't make
sense we want the menu to be a narrow
sidebar on the left hand side here and
we want the content to take up much more
space now we could do this without
adding more columns by simply doing one
fr
for fr for example now you can see that
the content takes up much more space
since the second column is four fraction
units and the first column is only one
fraction unit however this is not a very
flexible way of doing it because now
we're still stuck with two columns on a
website layout and you normally want a
lot more columns than that in order to
have the flexibility to shuffle around
and change the content so what i'm going
to do instead is
use repeat
give it 12 columns each of one fraction
unit now the menu and the content take
up one fraction unit each in other words
one column each and they're actually
forcing the columns to be as wide as
they need in order to
display their content which is the two
descriptions we've added inside items
in order to make this look nice again
i'm going to head into the content class
and give it a grid column
we know that it starts on the second
column line
two
and we want it to go all the way final
column line like that so we're gonna do
minus one and now we have a 12 column
layout instead of a two column layout
meaning that we have much more
flexibility if we want to shuffle around
on stuff and
notice that the footer and the header
still spans across the entire width
which is solely because we're using the
minus one here
if we had stuck with the three
here and here that wouldn't have worked
at all so let's change it back to -1 now
let's also look at the grid row property
as we're going to need that if we for
example want the menu here to span all
the way to the top in order to do that
we first have to change the header
though as we need to make the space here
available this little grid cell here
needs to be available for the menu
so we'll change it to two now we have a
blank cell here
meaning that we can head into the menu
class and give it a grid row
and set that to one slash
three
meaning that it spans from the first row
line to the third row line as you can
see took up the spot here in the top
left corner because this is the first
row line this is the second and here is
the third the fourth then is of course
the the bottom line
okay so before we jump on to the next
screencast i would recommend you to for
example try to make the menu span all
the way to the bottom or alternatively
make it appear on the right hand side
instead of on the left hand side then in
the next screencast i'm going to show
you a really cool way of defining
layouts which gives you a lot of
flexibility in terms of shuffling around
on the content and experimenting so stay
tuned and i'll see you there
hey in this screencast you're going to
learn a really cool feature of css grid
called template areas which allows you
to change an experiment with layouts
much more easily than with the
techniques you learned in the previous
cost
this feature is ideal for creating
prototypes of layouts quickly
we're using more or less the same
example from the previous screencast our
grid has 12 columns and 3 rows
the columns are just as they were in the
previous screencast however for the rows
i've changed the second one from 200
pixels to auto that means it'll take up
whatever available space there is left
in the height and combining that with
setting the height of the grid container
itself to a hundred percent this will
result in the grid being responsive in
the height as well as you can see if we
make it taller the second row grows with
the grid
now we're still using the grid column
property to adjust the position and size
of the items what we rather want to do
in this screencast is use something
called grid area
and to be able to do that we're going to
have to give the container a grid
template areas property
and the syntax you're about to see now
might seem a bit weird
it'll be a visual representation of the
grid
and the way it works is that we'll
create a string for each of the rows and
in those strings we'll create a cell for
each of the columns so let's add the
letter h 12 times in the first string
we have to give it exactly 12 characters
that has to match the amount of columns
so we're not actually defining the
columns or rows here we've already done
that up here
we're just naming them so that we can
refer them using these names later on
in the second row we'll add one m and 11
c's
like that
in the third row we'll add 12 f's
what you have here is a visual
representation of how we want our grid
to look like and as you might have
understood the age
m
c and f refer to header menu content and
footer
so now let's remove the old way of
positioning the items
like that and build up the grid over
again
we'll give the header a grid
area
of age as you can see
as a result the header takes up the
entire top row
just as we've defined here
we'll give the menu
a grid
area of m
content grid
area
c
footer
grid area of f
as you can see
our layout is just the way we want it to
be and it's responsive
now the reason this technique is
brilliant for creating mock-ups is
because now i want to make the menu span
all the way to the top like we did in
the previous screencast we can just
replace this age here with an m and as
you can see automatically the menu
popped up to the top if you want to make
it span all the way to the bottom let's
do the same thing here as well
and just as easy as that we have changed
layout without having to fiddle around
with the values in the item classes you
can also use dots
which will result in blank cells
like that
there
and there and now we have this
weird experimental layout where all the
corners are blank
now one thing you need to be aware of is
that the areas will only be valid if
they are rectangled try and match this
to an f so that the f footer goes like
that and then up you can see it breaks
the entire layout so you have to use
rectangles as you understand this is a
super simple way of experimenting with
the layout
so i'd recommend you to play around with
these values here so that you make sure
that you properly understand it and once
you've done that you have finished the
first section of this course so
congratulations you now know quite a lot
about cs grid however there's still a
lot of stuff to learn so in the next
section i'm going to teach you some more
advanced stuff and we're going to create
even more responsive grids that'll be
super cool so i'll see you there
hey and welcome to the second section in
this css grid course in it you're going
to learn more advanced concepts you've
already learned about responsiveness but
now we're going to take that to a new
level so here we have the setup for a
grid which you can see in the browser
window as well it's got six columns and
two rows and that's defined here and
should be pretty basic to you by now
both the columns and rows have a value
of 100 pixels in width and height so
this grid is not responsive now as you
can see but we know from previous cost
that we can turn it into responsive grid
by doing one fr instead
now the columns will grow and shrink
with the width of the container however
you wouldn't necessarily always want
your columns to be six like now they're
very squeezed together and at this point
they're suddenly very wide what you
perhaps rather want to do is for example
only have two in with when the example
is being viewed on a mobile and six in
width when it's viewed on a normal
screen
so let's make the amount of columns vary
with the width of the container
we'll first go back to having 100 pixels
here instead and then rather than hard
coding in six columns we're going to use
something called auto
fit now what will happen is that it'll
vary the amount of columns with the
width of the grid as you can see it
simply tries to fit as many columns as
possible into the container and when it
gets 100 pixels extra space on the right
hand side it'll boom add a new one so on
a very narrow screen it'll only show a
couple of columns however this doesn't
give us the responsiveness we want as
the amount of hundred pixel columns
rarely add up exactly to the width of
the container
then we get a situation like this
here where we have quite a lot of space
left on the right hand side though not
enough to add a new column that doesn't
look nice
now you might think that we could rather
do autofit
1fr however that'll only give us one
column because autofit tries to fill up
the grid with as many columns as
possible until there's not enough space
to add a new column
so when you use fraction unit it starts
by adding one column however then all
the width is used up immediately because
at that point
both the width of the entire container
and the first column are set to one
fraction unit
so to get the behavior we want we're
going to use something called
min max
and we'll set our columns to be minimum
100 pixels
maximum one fraction unit now you'll see
that the columns will always fit the
entire grid regardless of whether or not
the container exactly adds up to 100
pixels so what happens here is that the
columns will always be at least 100
pixels but if there's more available
space it'll simply distribute that
equally across all the columns
so now they are more or less 100 pixels
if we make the page a little bit wider
you can see that it stretches all of the
columns
so now the width of the container is
something like 550 pixels or something
however when it reaches 600 pixels there
it uses the minimum size for the columns
so that it can fit in six columns so it
prefers to use the minimum however when
it doesn't add up to exactly 500 or 600
pixels
it uses one fraction unit instead so now
we also get a nice view on mobile like
that and a nice view on a very wide
screen
okay so in the next screencast i'm going
to tell you about implicit rows so stay
tuned and i'll see you there
hey in this screencast we're going to
continue with the grid from the previous
one
as it still has an issue we need to fix
because if we make this grid narrow like
this
and have a look at the rows that are
created beneath the two rows we defined
we'll see that they're not acting the
way we want them to they're not 100
pixels in height which we defined here
they're only as tall as the content
inside of them force them to be
and that's because they are implicitly
created because as you can see here we
only explicitly created two rows however
with our current defined behavior for
the columns we are going to need
somewhere to place these items which
can't fit in our explicit grid up here
so from five and onwards we need to
create new rows automatically in order
to display our items and as we haven't
told our grid how we want to style rows
that it has to add to the grid itself it
just has to decide for itself how these
rows are going to look so let's fix this
because we can target these rows by
simply doing grid
auto rows
and set the value to 100 pixels
now as you can see
they're just how we want them to be
you can see that as well
grows and shrinks nicely
with all rows always being 100 pixels
tall
and now that we've defined this one we
can actually get rid of this one
like that
now all rows will be created implicitly
and they'll always be 100 pixels tall so
in the next screencast we're going to
tie all the concepts you've learned up
until now together and create a super
cool image grid
so i'm looking forward to see you there
hey and welcome to the final screencast
of the second section here we're going
to take what you've learned up until now
and use it to create really cool image
grid i've already created the setup
we're using the technique for
responsiveness which we talked about
previously using autofit in combination
with min max
which gives us a nice responsive grid
that varies the amount of columns
and the rows are implicitly created and
are 75 pixels tall in the index.html you
can see that i've added an image to each
of the items in the grid
that's of course the images you can see
here and this is already i'd say a
pretty cool grid however not all of
these images fit the frame they're given
equally well some of them might be more
horizontal while other images might be
more vertical i also have a few
favorites which i think deserve a little
bit of extra attention
you can see that i've actually given
some of these item classes like vertical
horizontal and
big
these are the images which i don't think
fit well into only one grid cell so
let's go ahead and make the
horizontal images twice as wide we'll
head over to the css
to the horizontal class and we'll set
the grid column property
now
previously we do something like 1 that's
the starting value and then for example
to span two so that they'd span across
two columns
however as you can see that'll force all
the horizontal images which is this one
and this one for example to start on the
first column line
if we enlarge the grid you'll see that
they'll but they'll still stick to the
first grid column line which amongst
other things leaves open spaces in the
grid which is something we're going to
talk about later on so what we rather
want to do is swap out this one here
with auto
now you can see
they start on whatever column line they
were given initially this one starts
here and these two now happen to start
on the first column line but if we
change the width you can see that the
horizontal images start on various grid
lines and not just one what we actually
also can do here is remove this entirely
and just do grid column span 2.
so the grid column and grid row
properties can take a lot of different
values and combinations and at this
point this is the simplest we can do
however i wanted to show you the various
alternatives
okay now let's do the same thing with
the vertical images the ones we want to
make taller than the rest of the images
so here we'll use grid row
and set that to span 2.
as you can see this one and this one
they're now taller than all the others
and now we've gotten a few blank cells
throughout the grid and we're going to
talk about that in a minute however
let's first make the big images the ones
we want to highlight twice as tall and
twice as wide as the normal images
grid column
and two
and grid
row
span two
now you can see this image here and this
one here and this one here are really
getting the attention they deserve
but we need to fix these blank spots
here because that doesn't look nice
so why do these blank spots appear
to understand that let's look at how the
grid lays out each of the items starts
up here in the top left corner lays out
the first item second third fourth fifth
and then it needs to continue on the
next row which is here
and it tries to fit in the sixth image
however when it's about to lay out that
one it can't fit it as it only has one
grid cell available here however the
sixth item is a big one it's this one
here let's double check that in the html
one two three four five six and that is
indeed a big item
so what it then does is that it
continues on looking
at the next cell that's already taken so
it jumps onto the next cell again and
here it actually has enough space to lay
out the big item
and then it simply continues laying out
the next item here here and then one
here
leaving that spot here blank
wouldn't it be great if we somehow could
fill these spots
well we can
and to do that we're going to use a
property called grid auto flow
it's by default set to row
meaning that it'll lay out the items
one row at a time just as we talked
about starting here and going
across the first row and then jumping
next to the second row and continuing on
like that however if we set it to
dense we'll use so-called dense packing
algorithm which attempts to fill the
holes in the grid
if there are holes in the grid and
smaller items come up later then it'll
move those up to fill the blank spaces
so if we
go back to row
we see that this space is blank
and the next item in the grid which
could potentially fit in here would be
not this one the sixth item but the
seventh item of the waterfall here so
let's look at what happens when we
change the dense
and indeed the waterfall image has now
jumped back to this position and filled
that hole and this works regardless of
how wide the screen is as you can see we
have a super cool image grid now
which looks really hard to create
actually however we've done it simply
using these 20 lines of css
and finally i want to mention that this
dense feature here is an example of
source order independence which is a
huge win for css
it means that the grid can arrange the
items regardless of how they're laid out
in the markup
here we simply use the markup for what
it's supposed to be used for markup for
content and we're using the css for what
it's supposed to be used for styling and
we're not limited to whatever order we
laid out the images initially so source
order independence gives you a lot of
flexibility
so this marks the end of this section
you now know quite a lot about building
advanced css grid layouts however be
sure to check out the bonus material if
you're hungry to learn even more
thank you
hey in this screencast you're going to
learn a new way of positioning and
sizing the items on the grid using
something called named lines so we've
defined our normal grid here which is
the website layout you should be
familiar with by now though in this case
we're defining it in the very simple way
of only having
two columns one being one fraction unit
and one being five fraction units so
we're not using the flexible 12 column
layout here as this setup makes it
easier when using named lines so to
brush up a little bit the grid has
column lines and row lines the first
column line is the one on the left hand
side the second one is the one
separating the two columns and the third
one is the one on the far right hand
side
and our content item for example is
defined to span from the second row line
to the third row line from here
to here
in our code that will be from the line
that goes in between here and
until the line that goes here so what we
now can do is we can add a square
bracket in between write content start
for example
and on the third line and write content
and like that
now what we can do
is we can
swap out the number two here with
content start
and the number three with
punch and end
like that
and as you can see that works fine if we
wanted to do the same thing for the
header we'd have to give a name to the
first line as well up here
let's call that
main start
so now the header spans from main start
to content end
however i actually want to call this
line main end as well because there
might be a case in the future where we
want to reference the main end
explicitly not use content end as a
proxy for it
so
so let's just add a new name here
main end like that just give it a space
and then the new name
now we can do main art
main end
as you can see works perfectly fine
the footer can get the exact same layout
like that now let's also name the rows
using the exact same convention
we'll do
main start
i'm just going to copy them under and
start
end
and main end like that
now you might wonder why
we've been using this dash syntax here
and that's because they give you a
little bit of magic
now given that we've called this line
here for content start and this line
here for content end
the grid knows that this is the content
column or columns if that was the case
so you can actually set the grid column
to
just
content like that and as you can see it
works
now the header and the footer spans from
main start to main end so we can do the
exact same thing there as well just use
grid column main
and to take this even a step further
actually we can also use grid area in
one of these cases that'll be in the
content case because let's have a look
at the content lines
both the row lines and the column lines
so we know we have the content start
here and the content end here
though we also have a content start here
the second row line
first
second
so this one here and we have a content
end on the third row line
the third one here
meaning we have boxed in an area with
content lines
here
here here here and here
and now we can actually use grid area
which you which you might remember from
section one of this course
by simply doing grid area and set it to
content
like that and it still works
however you might be tempted to try and
do the same thing down on the footer
though that wouldn't work
because it has to be boxed in by four
main lines
though the main start row line
is the one that starts up here not down
here above the footer so here we have
only kind of boxed it partially in we
have the main start column line here
which is the start of the footer and the
main end row line which is the bottom of
the footer and the main end column line
which is the right hand side of the
footer though the top of the footer is
the content end line
so we can't use grid area main here as
you can see it breaks the entire layout
so be careful and make sure that you
have properly boxed in an area before
you start using grid area
okay that was it for this bonus
screencast thank you
hey in this screencast i'm going to show
you how to justify and align the entire
content of a grid i've added here a
black border around the grid container
so that we can see its edges we've also
made sure that the grid is fully
responsive and that there's a little bit
of space around it so right now our grid
items only occupy a tiny part of the
entire grid container and that's
important in order to learn about
justifying and aligning the content so
let's start with the justification which
defines and distributes space between
and round the items
along the row axis from left to right
so if we set
justify content
and set that to
end as you can see that'll shuffle all
the content over to the right hand side
to the end of that axis the row axis the
default value here was
start you can also do center like that
that'll center it along the row axis so
let's combine this with a line content
as well
and do end for example
i'll push all the content down to the
lower end of the grid
because aligning controls the content
along the column axis the vertical one
which goes from top to bottom if we do
center here as well
we'll fully center the items in the grid
now let's comment out this one
and have a look at the other values you
can use here because there's a couple of
cool ones if we for example want a lot
of space in between the items we can do
space
queen
now we have as much space as possible in
between the items along the row axis we
can also do space evenly like that
which distributes the items evenly
throughout the row axis
so the items have an equal amount of
space around them
finally there's also the space round
this one is pretty similar to space
evenly though each of the items have a
half size space on either end
meaning that if you have two items
besides each other that'll give a full
size space between them though here in
between the first column line and the
first item you only have a half space as
this item forces a half space on this
side
though the grid line itself doesn't
force the grid to create any space for
it
though in between these two
both of the items forced the grid to add
a half space in between them resulting
resulting in full size space
so that was the basics of justifying and
aligning the content thank you
hey in this screencast i'll teach you
how to justify and align the items on
the grid so here we have our classic
website layout it contains 12 columns in
the width each are one fraction unit and
three rows
where the second one is auto
so this grid is responsive in both width
and height
as you can see
we have defined the width of each of the
items using the grid column value so for
the header for example we're saying
start at the first column line which is
this one and end at the last one which
is this one over on the right hand side
so it's kind of stretching from the
start point to the end point and this
axis here the row axis is the one you
control with justification so if we do
so if we do
justify items
that'll be by default set to scratch
however if we for example want each of
the items to rather center itself as
much as possible and not stretch all the
way from the left hand side to the right
hand side we can use
center
as you can see now each of the items are
centered at as much as possible you can
also use start that'll squeeze all of
them towards the left hand side and end
is the opposite of this that'll squeeze
all the items to the right hand side now
let's comment out this a little bit
and use the line items property that'll
do the same thing though along the
column axis so the vertical axis from
top to bottom
so if we do center here
you can see that each of the items are
now squeezed together towards the center
though not on the left to right row axis
but on the top to bottom column axis we
can do
end that'll squeeze all them to the
bottom
or start that'll squeeze them towards
the top
now
let's do center again and combine this
with
center here
now all the items just a tiny rectangle
in the center of the grid cells which
are originally occupied fully
now i have no idea why you'd want to
create a website layout like this it's
really weird but that's besides the
point of this screencast
finally
let's
finally let's comment out these two
get back to the original layout
and look at how you can do the same
thing though only targeting one of the
items
let's head into the content for example
then you can use
just justify self
and do center
and now only the content is entered
you
align
off as well
undo end and now the content is squeezed
down to this tiny little box in the
bottom center of the huge space it
originally occupied a little bit sad
actually to see the content to see the
content being turned into a shadow of
itself like that
so let's give it back its
original space like that
okay so that was it i hope you learned
something and feel free to play around
with this yourself thank you
hey in this screencast i'm going to
explain the difference between autofit
and autofill so here we have two
different grids using one or the other
you can see them on the page here and
i'm assuming that you understand the
basics of this
complicated expression here where we're
basically repeating with autofit as many
columns as we can fit into the grid
given these constraints here
they should be minimum 100 pixels and
maximum one fraction unit and that as
you probably remember from the
screencast in the second section will
give a nice responsive behavior where
the amount of columns grows with the
size of the grid
like this if we enlarge in this page
boom there the grid crossed the 300
pixel threshold meaning it could fit
three columns in instead of two and as
we make it more wide the columns become
one fraction unit until it reaches the
next threshold which is 400 pixels and
boom then autofit and auto fill adds
another column to the grid since we now
can fit 400 pixel columns into the grid
however there's a slight difference
between the two and that'll be apparent
if we try to enlarge the grid even more
like
this
now but you can see that auto fill
actually added
a fifth column even though we don't have
a fifth element to add there
whereas autofit made sure that the four
items we have actually fit the grid now
under the hood what's happening here is
actually that both of them add new
column tracks though autofit
actually collapses those new columns to
zero pixels in width so that the current
items you have in the grid when defined
like this with a maximum size of one
fraction unit actually will fit to the
grid regardless whereas auto fill at
every 100 threshold like there and there
and there it'll add new column tracks
which basically are empty so that was
the difference between autofit and
autofill
in this example
i
will
show you how you can use css grids to
create an article layout
so in this example i have a plain
article that i've written i wrote it
originally in markdown and then i
generated this html using a markdown
compiler
so it's not
so it's pretty nice it has ul's it has
some piece and there's a div here for
the
code highlighting
and a fixture a figure tag for the image
and just basic html
and
i'm just going to go straight ahead and
turn this into grid
and then i will explain
what i'm trying to accomplish
with that
so
oh it looks now we have a grid which is
very funky
move everything where i want it i want
them to be
and
there we go
so now i've defined the grid which has
three columns there's the first column
that's 80 pixels then there's a main
column that takes
one fraction of the space
and then there's the right column that
takes 80 pixels
and i have this rule here which says
that every element inside the article
should start at the grid column line
number two
so remember that the grid column line
one goes down here
two goes down here then we have three
over here and four over there
and by setting grid column 2 we say that
every element should start in this
column
and we need to set the min width to 0 to
actually allow it to shrink if we don't
set this
you will see that it
goes all the way over there
now
right now this is just a way of adding
some spaces on the side
but
since this is a grid we can now do
some things very easily
since i now want this figure
take the whole width
and
that was all
and let's add some space on top of it
right so what did we do here i set the
grid column to start at line one and end
at line minus one which is the last one
so this is the way i was saying
make the element take the whole width
and this is just
radically simple then
any other way to accomplish the same
thing
if you don't have a css grid you end up
having to say that these elements here
should have a margin
and standard margin and this should not
you need to cancel out the margin you
set by default
and often this is very tricky because
you
often end up having to have custom
html
uh just to handle where things should
when they should be narrow and when they
should be white
and it's can be really tricky deciding
where to put things
so another thing that we can do is to
add another element
i'm going to call it aside
and here i'm going to just write
some texts
includes so now we have this new
paragraph over here
and now i can style it
and now i want to style it like this i
want to say it in the third column
i want it to have like a gray color
[Music]
and
like that
and smaller font size
this seems like a good time to add
gap
spacing between
so
yeah and if i wanted to be on the left
side i can just set it to grid comes
three one
and
trust me if you're trying to do this
without a grid it's it's so hacky
uh
i can't even begin to think like because
you have this element here which
originally has a margin
and then maybe if you put both of these
elements inside the same div
maybe you can do like position absolute
and set left 100
or something
yeah i don't know i don't really know
this is just something i don't know a
clean way of doing in plain css
uh and especially not in the way where
you can have
no changes in the html basically
now there is one thing you need to know
and that is this is actually a separate
grid so this is becoming a grid row that
goes here and this is a separate grid
row
and this has the consequence
that you often end up with this spaces
you might in this case want this space
to be gone and then this text to go down
further
to the right side of the header but
that's currently not possible with css
grid
that's just a limitation
that you can't really avoid
and whether it's good or bad i don't
really know in this case i don't think
it's that bad because this paragraph
belongs with this paragraph and here we
have a header which starts a completely
new section so it's not that big of a
problem but if we had like another
paragraph over here
it can be a bit confusing
that you have these big spaces
which isn't quite optimal
but other than that i find that using
css grid for this type of article layout
makes the
the html much cleaner you can basically
just take
the output from a markdown parser
and dump it straight in you don't need
to do anything special to support either
having things in the left column or the
right column
or in in full width
and the styling itself it's 20 lines
and even here i haven't touched anything
like block quotes
but here's the quote maybe you also want
that to be
in the full width
oh we should remove the margin at the
side and maybe we want to set a color
once again
and maybe like border to the left is
cool
thing as well
and notice that i can just add padding
add borders
i just set the column to be from one to
minus one and everything works
i don't need to worry about negative
margins or
or or knowing what the wind of this
column is so now if i want to set the
left column to be 17 instead or maybe 40
and the right column to be 40 that works
perfectly fine
and all is just very very good
thanks
hey in this screencast i'm going to talk
about the difference between flexbox and
grid and i'm also going to show you how
you can use the two together so we have
a header here which is built using
flexbox and a page layout which is built
using css grid here is the html for the
grid example and the html for the
flexbox example and the css is located
in the index.css file here and we're
going to look at this code in a minute
however let's first look at the examples
themselves because you might actually be
able to guess the main difference
between flexbox and grid just by looking
at these two examples because flexbox is
built for one dimensional layout like
this one it goes in one direction from
left
to right being just a single row whereas
css grid is built for two dimensional
layouts like this page here it has three
rows
the top one the middle one and the
bottom one that actually has 12 columns
though we can only see two of them
visually here due to how we've laid out
the items so if you're going to create
layout which has a direction either row
or column then use flexbox it's great
for aligning content within that
container and gives you a lot of
flexibility however if you're going to
create a more overall layout with both
rows and columns then you should
definitely use css grid as it'll give
you much more flexibility and simpler
markup than if you were to for example
try to use flexbox to create
two-dimensional layouts okay there's
also another overall difference which is
that flexbox takes basis in the content
it's so called content first whereas
grid
is layout first it takes spaces in the
layout
now this might seem a little bit
abstract so let's look into the code
because that'll make it a bit more clear
so the flexbox header here is turned
into a flexible box by simply giving it
a display flex we don't have to do
anything else
we then let the content make most of the
decisions of where they're going to be
placed throughout the container for
example you can see the
third child here the
log out element simply adds a margin to
its left hand side and thereby shoving
itself all the way to the end of the
container now let's look at how we
create our grid layout first of all we
can't just simply give it a display grid
and then start shoving content into the
container no we also have to define
either columns or rows or both as we're
doing here we're giving it 12 columns
each being a fraction unit wide and
three rows and just by doing this you
can understand that grid to a larger
degree takes basis in the layout first
you're constrained by the layout you
define here whereas we could have added
as many items in the width on this
single row in our header here we're now
constrained with 12 columns in our grid
example here
and also we need to place the elements
according to the layout
for example this menu item here this one
which you can see on the left hand side
here we're not placing it here by giving
it a margin on its right hand side like
we do on the log out
we're taking bases in the layout and
saying that we wanted to span from the
first column line to the second column
line and thereby it places itself how we
want
this layout first versus content first
is a bit abstract and it's not something
you think about when you develop though
it's nice to be aware of it
so finally let's actually combine the
two because that's what you want to do
you want to combine css grid with
flexbox
and then get the best of both worlds
so now what we're going to do we're
going to take this header here move it
down into our age layout
so let's head over to the html and take
the three elements here
copy them
and add them here
like that
so what we now will do is we'll turn the
header here
into a flexbox
giving it a display of flex
now let's run this code
as you can see we have the items laid
out like this
what we now can do is we can use for
example justify content
do for example space evenly like that as
you can see they change accordingly
however let's do what we did in the
flexbox layout
target the
third child
log out button
margin left
arrow
as easy as that
you've combined css grid with flexbox
now this header here
this
item in the grid container is actually a
flex container itself which then again
has three items within itself so i hope
you learned something from this and that
you'll start using grid and flexbox
together from now on
thank you